-   Ancient Lamps in the J. Paul Getty Museum

    Jean Bussière

    Birgitta Lindros Wohl

    The J. Paul Getty Museum

    Los Angeles

**\[Copyright Page\]**

The free online edition of this catalogue, available at
http://www.getty.edu/publications/ancientlamps, includes zoomable
high-resolution photography **\[add mention of other features as
appropriate\]**. Also available are free PDF, EPUB, and MOBI downloads of
the book, CSV and JSON downloads of the object data from the catalogue,
and JPG and PPT downloads of the main catalogue images.

© 2017 J. Paul Getty Trust

Except where otherwise noted, this work is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. To view a copy of this
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ or send a
letter to Creative Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042.

\[Insert map credit.\]

First edition, 2017

https://www.github.com/gettypubs/ancientlamps

**Published by the J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles**

Getty Publications

1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500

Los Angeles, California 90049-1682

www.getty.edu/publications

Benedicte Gilman, *Project Editor*

Rachel Barth, *Editorial Assistant*

Elizabeth Chapin Kahn, *Production*

Eric Gardner, *Designer and Developer*

Greg Albers, *Project Manager*

Distributed in the United States and Canada by the University of Chicago
Press

Distributed outside the United States and Canada by Yale University
Press, London

Printed in the United States of America

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data TK

ISBN 978-1-60606-515-0 (online)

ISBN 978-1-60606-513-6 (pbk.)

ISBN 978-1-60606-514-3 (epub)

Landing page image: TK

**&lt;CT&gt;**Contents

Director’s Foreword

Acknowledgments

Abbreviations and Notes to Readers

Introduction

Typological Classification

Catalogue

Index of Discus Decors

Index of Signatures and Inscriptions

Index of Donors and Vendors

Concordance of Accession Numbers and Catalogue Numbers

Concordance of Lamps formerly Classified as Forgeries

Bibliography

About the Authors

**&lt;CT&gt;**Director’s Foreword

TK

Timothy Potts

*Director*

*The J. Paul Getty Museum*

**&lt;CT&gt;**Acknowledgments

A project of the scope of the present work necessarily accumulates many
debts of gratitude. It is a pleasure to record these debts at this final
point.

First, we were fortunate to be able to study the material in the
inspiring environment of the Getty Villa in Malibu and to be guided
through the commendably organized and recorded collection by a friendly
and helpful staff. Our thanks go first to Kenneth Lapatin, associate
curator of Antiquities, for his support of the project; he was always
ready to accommodate us in the midst of many other museum duties. Former
Senior Curator Karol Wight enthusiastically furthered the project at
every turn during her time as head of the Antiquities Department. Their
colleagues, especially David Saunders, Jens Daehner, Nicole Budrovich,
and Mary Louise Hart, responded with efficiency and patience to our need
for revisiting both items and issues. We are grateful to Claire Lyons,
Curator of Antiquities, who shepherded our manuscript through the
process of publishing it as an online catalogue.

Special thanks go to the departments of Antiquities Conservation and
Photography of the Museum, both further acknowledged in the context of
the introduction below. The contributions and expertise of their staff
have greatly enhanced this catalogue. Marina Belozerskaya, formerly of
Getty Publications, helpfully responded to many questions at an early
point. The greatest debt of gratitude we owe, however, to our editor and
friend, Benedicte Gilman. We regard ourselves very fortunate to have had
access to her unequaled professional competence and standards, as well
as her amazingly sharp eye for every detail. She guided us firmly and
kindly through the intricacies of the process to a much improved end
product and managed with diplomacy to make the year-long process in the
end a pleasure of enlightenment. **\[Acknowledge other Publications
staff here\]**

The Getty Research Institute has provided a haven for scholarly work. We
are most grateful to its staff, which was always ready to provide
service with material desired, as well as to answer a variety of
questions in response to our needs.

Several institutions outside the United States also deserve our
gratitude for assistance and welcoming cooperation. Some were visited by
Jean Bussière alone, others by both authors. At the Römisch-Germanische
Kommission, Frankfurt, our special thanks go to its director, Dr.
Susanne Sievers, and to its chief librarian, Dr. Gabriele Rasbach; at
the Römisch-Germanisches Museum, Cologne, we thank Professor Heinrich
Hellenkemper, now retired, and Dr. Eva Maria Cahn-Klaiber, whose
assistance and information concerning the rich lamp collection of that
museum were most helpful. At Bochum University Museum, its head curator,
Dr. Cornelia Weber-Lehmann, amiably facilitated access to the Schüller
collection there and provided valuable information, while Karin Goethert
allowed us to reproduce some figures from her catalogue; our further
thanks to the Maison Mediterranéenne des Sciences Humaines,
Aix-en-Provence; the Maison de l’Orient, Lyon; and the Centre
Archéologique de Lattes (UMR 5140, CNRS). Our special thanks to
librarians Marie-Paule Seure, and Brigitte Nouvel (Aix), Véronique
Humbert, and Christine Lam (Lattes).

Our project further profited from the interest and generosity of many
individuals. Birgitta Wohl is grateful to—among others—John Traill
(Toronto) for expert assistance with some Greek inscriptions. Jean
Bussière is especially indebted to Donald M. Bailey and Carlo Pavolini
for always answering his various questions and providing encouragement;
to Laurent Chrzanovski for free access to his rich lychnological
documents at the Institut Multimédia Roumain-Suisse directed by his
wife; and to Michel Feugère (CNRS UMR 5138 MOM LYON) for his constant
availability and willingness to tackle our electronic problems.

Many others in the scholarly community on two continents gave of their
time and expertise in small and large questions, discussions, and
suggestions—especially during the various congresses of the
International Lychnological Association (ila). We cannot mention them
all, but we wish to express our thanks particularly to the following:
Nina Berson (Los Angeles), Anastasia Dinsmoor (Washington, D.C.), Marc
André Haldiman (Geneva), Marcus Heinrich Hermanns (Cologne), John Lund
(Copenhagen), Maria Marani (Rome), Jean-Louis Podvin (Lille), John
Pollini (Los Angeles), Laurent Wilmet (Namur), and Denis Zuravlev
(Moscow). We thank Jean-Claude Rivel (Bastia) for his excellent drawings
and his generosity in sharing his own lamp collection.

Finally, we wish to express our warm thanks to Marion True, former
curator of Antiquities at the J. Paul Getty Museum. She initiated the
catalogue project and supported it by giving us the possibility to work
from an excellent set of black-and-white photographs, making it possible
to start the study at a time when the lamps themselves were crated up
and inaccessible. Without the additional help of Kelly Ramage (Los
Angeles) the work would have been much further delayed. He rapidly and
ably created the multiple color work photos necessary for the next
stage. His constant readiness and generosity in sharing his considerable
expertise, also in electronic communications, was a welcome support,
which we greatly appreciate.

J. B.

B. L. W.

**&lt;CT&gt;**Abbreviations and Notes to Readers

All measurements are in centimeters.

References to “cat./cats.” are cross-references to entries in the
present catalogue. References to “cat. no./nos.” refer to other
catalogues.

An “ovo pattern” is a motif often found on the base of African
second-century-a.d. lamps. It consists of two small circles linked by a
V-shaped design. None of these parts is a letter. This motif is repeated
three times evenly displayed between two circular lines. For slight
variations, see Bussière 2000 (p. 235, nos. 76–78). The pattern may be
specific to some workshops.

**\[Add an explanation of what “place of manufacture or origin”
means\]**

acc. no. accession number

Afr. African

BM The British Museum

Bus. Bussière, with reference to nozzle forms (e.g., Bus. 2a)

ca. circa

cat. catalogue number, Getty collection

cat. no. catalogue number, other collections

col./cols. column/-s

D depth

Diam diameter

dim. dimension

east. eastern

ed. editor/edited by

edn. edition

e.g. for instance

esp. especially

ex. example/-s

fasc. fascicule/-s

fig./figs. figure/-s

fr./frr. fragment/-s

H height

i.e. for instance

ILA International Lychnological Association

inv. no. inventory number

It. Italian

L length

MAN Musée d’Archéologie Nationale de Saint-Germain-en-Laye

max. maximum

MNR Museo Nazionale Romano/ Barbera and Petriaggi 1993

n./nn. note/-s

no./nos. number/-s

p./pp. page/-s

pl./pls. plate/-s

pres. preserved

ref./refs. reference/-s

suppl. supplement

TSA Terra Sigillata Africana

var./vars. variant/-s

vol./vols. volume/-s

W width

**&lt;CT&gt;**Introduction

The Getty collection of well over six hundred ancient lamps began late
in the history of the comparatively young museum. The lamps did not form
part of Mr. Getty’s personal interests—which focused mainly on paintings
and sculpture—but belong (with one exception) rather to the policy of
systematic broadening of the holdings after Mr. Getty’s death in 1975.
The earliest acquisitions of lamps in the form of gifts were in fact
from that year, soon joined by others. Most gifts predate the purchased
acquisitions, except for the Fleischman group of 1996. (See the Index of
Donors and Vendors.) Apart from two single purchases (in 1973 and 2003),
the majority of the Getty lamps came to the Museum in 1983, through the
Gallerie Günter Puhze in Freiburg, which facilitated the sale of a
German private collection owned by Hans-Klaus Schüller. After some
exchange of limited items, the final collection acquired contained 557
lamps of clay, bronze, and lead and one mold ([cat. 458](458)). Of
these, twenty-five were registered as fakes; however, after careful
examination, all have been judged by the authors of the present
catalogue to be genuine, and they have been included here with clear
indications of their changed status (and possible remaining doubts).

Hans-Klaus Schüller maintained a long-standing interest in lamps and
must be regarded as a fine connoisseur. In the 1970s he sold 410 lamps
to Bochum University; those lamps are on permanent display in the Bochum
Museum, awaiting publication by Dr. Heinrich Hermanns of Cologne
University. In 1983 Mr. Schüller sold a second collection to the Getty
Museum. The Bochum and the Getty collections exhibit striking
similarities and homogeneity, even to the point of having fifty-one
identical items. This is not surprising, for it is known that Mr.
Schüller traveled and prospected in the same areas over long periods:
principally Asia Minor, further in Tunisia, and less extensively in
Egypt, Italy, and Greece. At the very beginning of his interest in
lamps, he acquired some in Germany, where it is assumed they were
excavated, possibly shortly after World War i.

The first objective of the present work is to provide a typological
classification of the lamps, as far as possible presented in
chronological order. The typological variety of the Getty Museum lamps
is considerable, derived as they are from very diverse regions of the
Mediterranean basin: twenty-four forms are without parallel in the wide
literature consulted, and fifty-six forms have only an approximate
closeness to known types. No existing typological classification alone
can account for this diversity. Thus we have taken recourse in several
typologies, widely accepted by lychnologists, such as those of Dressel,
Loeschcke, Broneer, Howland, Deneauve, Ennabli, Bailey, Bussière, and
the fundamental Italian *Atlante delle forme ceramiche.*

Each lamp type in this catalogue is presented by an introduction
summarizing its characteristics, listing its workshop signatures,
proposing its chronology, and debating potential problems. Thanks to
parallels found in the now-abundant specialized literature and to a
variety of criteria, the Getty lamps have been divided into three major
sections:

> i\. Phoenico-Punic lamps
>
> ii\. Greek and Hellenistic lamps
>
> iii\. Roman-period lamps

Because of our recurrent ignorance of the exact place of manufacture or
origin of the lamps—the place where they have been excavated and not
just purchased—it has proved useful to subdivide section iii, by far the
largest one, into three further categories:

> A. Lamps from both the western and eastern provinces of the Roman
> Empire
>
> B. Lamps from North African provinces only
>
> C. Lamps from eastern provinces only

B and C then concern lamps produced exclusively in one of the two
geographical areas distinguished. They exhibit particular forms and
decors, recognizable looks and clay color, and mostly signatures and
workshop marks specific to those areas. In category A, on the other
hand, it is not always easy to confirm whether a lamp—whose findspot is
not known with certainty—derives from the western or the eastern part of
the Mediterranean. Take, for instance, a given Getty lamp of type
Loeschcke i or iv: was it fabricated in Italy and exported to Asia
Minor, or was it made in Asia Minor from Italic models? Italic-type
lamps from the end of the Roman Republic and the first century of the
empire certainly were exported to the provinces. But the provincial
regions rapidly produced lighting devices of their own that imitated the
Italic models, adding their own characteristics, when not emerging as
downright original creations.

A series of minute observations have allowed us to distinguish, among
the numerous lamps of Loeschcke type viii, those items that were clearly
produced in the east (group C) and cannot be considered Italic or
African (group A). The following criteria apply to group C:

> 1\. Globules on the shoulder, on each side of the handle or nozzle,
> either in relief or half sunken within a small circle
>
> 2\. Small incised circles at the foot of the handle, at mid-shoulder, or
> on top of the nozzle
>
> 3\. Pronounced depth of the basin
>
> 4\. Bases of 2nd- to 6th-century lamps have a plain *planta pedis,* often
> large and deeply impressed
>
> 5\. Clay, glaze, or slip is often a vivid red orange or dark brown.
> Frequent presence of gold or silver mica particles in the clay

Most of the time information about place of manufacture or origin given
by donors and vendors is vague, indicating the region or country where
lamps have been purchased, for instance, Italy, Tunisia, or Anatolia.
Only in a few cases is the place of manufacture or origin more precise
by including a site, for instance, Paestum, Carthage, or El Djem.
Readers should therefore always remember that such places of manufacture
or origin have little scientific validity. We record them exactly as
they have been given by collectors and as they are listed in the Getty’s
online collection catalogue.

The second objective of this work is to describe each object, as
faithfully as possible, according to a pre-established and consistent
order: measurements, state of preservation, clay and surface treatment,
shape of basin, shoulder, discus decor, details of nozzle and base, and
the possible presence of a signature or a workshop mark.

Our description of the state of preservation has greatly benefited from
helpful discussions and the professional expertise of members of the
Getty Museum’s Antiquities Conservation Department: Eduardo Sánchez and
Susan Lansing Maish for the terracotta items, and Jeffrey Maish for the
bronze lamps. In several cases, clever and frequent restorations,
disguised with overpaint, can be assumed to derive from the collector.
Some are obvious, others nearly invisible to the naked eye; the latter
have been revealed by X-ray or ultraviolet techniques, and in some cases
by simpler laboratory testing, for which we are very grateful.
Twenty-five lamps had been registered as fakes, as mentioned above; all
but one, however, we consider to be authentic. Analyses by the
conservationists confirmed our opinion in the majority of cases. We
still have doubt about [cat. 56](56); a clay analysis should be done for
its authentication.

Munsell Color Charts have been used to describe the colors of the clay
and glaze or slip, with some reservations. In spite of the limitations
of a pre-set scheme—felt especially in the vitreous shades of green in
the newer edition of Munsell—the charts afford a measure of objectivity,
if used under meticulously consistent lighting conditions. The distinct
advantage of the Munsell charts over subjective verbal descriptions is
obvious and has been remarked on in the literature. Nevertheless,
complete precision will always remain elusive: thus, while the numeric
chart variations cover most bases, the verbal descriptions in the charts
often give limited options (which is why it is often necessary to have
the Munsell book in hand). Furthermore, depending on position and
exposure to different oven temperatures during firing, a lamp may take
on different shades in different areas. In addition, as described above,
a modern layer of paint camouflages numerous restorations to the Getty
lamps. The only way to reach the clay layer for observation would be to
strip the surface—not usually an procedure acceptable by museums. If we
have not been able to observe the clay, it is so stated. Even without
modern interference, many lamps exhibit a variety of shades of glaze or
slip, which is so reported; this includes zones darkened either in the
original firing or through later accidents.

Drawings of the discus decors have been considered unnecessary here, due
to the excellent quality of the photographs, which in the digital format
can be enlarged at will. Following the examples of Bailey’s BM ii and
Bussière’s 2000 catalogues, we have limited ourselves to providing an
alphanumeric repertory of the discus decors. The Getty Museum lamps
present a particularly rich store of discus decors: forty-nine are
totally new, while 105 are near variants on known themes, but without
exact parallels. These conclusions are based on detailed research in
nearly two thousand lamp publications. Parallels found for a specific
decor are given in the catalogue entries. The bibliography lists about
five hundred publications yielding comparanda.

The index of inscriptions gives an alphabetical list of the texts and
workshop signatures or marks. For closer study of the presumed
geographic locations of the workshops and their activity periods, we
refer readers to BM ii (chapter 3, pp. 89–121), and to bm iii (chapter
3, pp. 95–147); for the repertory of North African workshop marks,
readers should consult Bussière 2000 (pp. 215–37).

The illustrations for this work are exceptionally abundant. Each lamp is
shown in three color images—top, bottom, and profile—created by the
remarkable professional competence of former Getty Museum photographer
Ellen Rosenbery and current photographers Tahnee Cracchiola and Rebecca
Truszkowski. Inscriptions and workshop marks are also reproduced, all in
all creating a unique visual catalogue, which should make for easy and
unusually rich access to the Getty Museum’s collection of ancient lamps.

This work is the fruit of four years of collaboration by two scholars,
both lychnologists, who bring together separate backgrounds and working
experiences from different parts of the Mediterranean: North Africa and
the Greek East.

Jean Bussière, based in Montpellier in France, has undertaken the
typological classification, the catalogue entries, and the research of
parallels; he is responsible for the chronologies, the introductions to
the types, the decorative repertory, and the index of Roman
inscriptions.

Birgitta Wohl, who lives in Los Angeles, has been the liaison with the
Museum. She organized and supervised the preliminary photos taken by
Kelly Ramage, without which this transatlantic enterprise would not have
been possible. She is responsible for the measurements of all the lamps
as well as their color identifications with the Munsell Color Charts;
the introductions, entries, and comparanda to the lamps of Broneer type
xxvii and xxviii; the Late Palestinian circular lamps, section 47; the
metal lamps, section iv, with their bibliography; and the index of Greek
inscriptions. She has also undertaken the definitive fashioning of the
text in English.

Apart from these divisions, a number of issues of organization,
presentation, and interpretation were solved by common discussions over
a period of time. We hope the result offers the practical and useful
tool we envisioned.

The authors completed their work on this catalogue in November 2012.
However, because of the large photography program needed for the many
lamps, the publication of the catalogue had to be postponed for several
years. Due to other commitments each author had, it has not been
possible to update the general bibliographic references beyond 2012; the
bibliography for individual lamps has been updated through 2015.

**&lt;CT&gt;**About the Authors

Jean Bussière was educated at the Universities of Lyon, Dijon, and
Grenoble, receiving his MA (*licence de lettres*) and DES (*diplôme
d'études supérieures*). He won a Canada Council scholarship in 1960 and
studied for a year at Victoria College, University of Toronto. For
several years he taught in Algeria, where he developed a passion for
archaelogy and lychnology. From 1989 to 2001 he was an associate
researcher with UPR 217 CNRS, Antiquités africaines. Since 2003 he has
been associated with UMR 140-390 CNRS Lattes, University of Montpellier.
In 1993 he was awarded le Prix de l'Académie d'Hippone in
Aix-en-Provence. He is the author of *Lampes antiques d'Algérie* 1–3
(2000–2007), *Lampes antiques de Méditerranée: La collection Rivel*, in
collaboration with J.-Cl. Rivel (BAR International Series 2428
\[2012\]). He has written several articles and participated in the
congresses of the ILA (International Lychnological Association).

Birgitta Lindros Wohl was educated at the University of Stockholm,
Sweden (*Fil.kand*.), and at University of California, Los Angeles (M.A.
and Ph.D.). She is retired from teaching Art History and Classics at
California State University Northridge. Her excavations comprise sites
in her native Sweden as well as Italy and Greece, the latter at Isthmia,
where she is still active. Her professional interests, apart from
ancient lamps, include Roman architecture, the use of *spolia,* and
Latin literature. She has published in these fields and lectured
internationally; she serves on the boards of ILA and the Cyprus American
Archaeological Institute.
