---
title: Acknowledgments
layout: page
sort_order: 3
---

# Acknowledgments

A project of the scope of the present work necessarily accumulates many
debts of gratitude. It is a pleasure to record these debts at this final
point.

First, we were fortunate to be able to study the material in the
inspiring environment of the Getty Villa in Malibu and to be guided
through the commendably organized and recorded collection by a friendly
and helpful staff. Our thanks go first to Kenneth Lapatin, associate
curator of Antiquities, for his support of the project; he was always
ready to accommodate us in the midst of many other museum duties. Former
Senior Curator Karol Wight enthusiastically furthered the project at
every turn during her time as head of the Antiquities Department. Their
colleagues, especially David Saunders, Jens Daehner, Nicole Budrovich,
and Mary Louise Hart, responded with efficiency and patience to our need
for revisiting both items and issues. We are grateful to Claire Lyons,
Curator of Antiquities, who shepherded our manuscript through the
process of publishing it as an online catalogue.

Special thanks go to the departments of Antiquities Conservation and
Photography of the Museum, both further acknowledged in the context of
the introduction below. The contributions and expertise of their staff
have greatly enhanced this catalogue. Marina Belozerskaya, formerly of
Getty Publications, helpfully responded to many questions at an early
point. The greatest debt of gratitude we owe, however, to our editor and
friend, Benedicte Gilman. We regard ourselves very fortunate to have had
access to her unequaled professional competence and standards, as well
as her amazingly sharp eye for every detail. She guided us firmly and
kindly through the intricacies of the process to a much improved end
product and managed with diplomacy to make the year-long process in the
end a pleasure of enlightenment. **\[Acknowledge other Publications
staff here\]**

The Getty Research Institute has provided a haven for scholarly work. We
are most grateful to its staff, which was always ready to provide
service with material desired, as well as to answer a variety of
questions in response to our needs.

Several institutions outside the United States also deserve our
gratitude for assistance and welcoming cooperation. Some were visited by
Jean Bussière alone, others by both authors. At the Römisch-Germanische
Kommission, Frankfurt, our special thanks go to its director, Dr.
Susanne Sievers, and to its chief librarian, Dr. Gabriele Rasbach; at
the Römisch-Germanisches Museum, Cologne, we thank Professor Heinrich
Hellenkemper, now retired, and Dr. Eva Maria Cahn-Klaiber, whose
assistance and information concerning the rich lamp collection of that
museum were most helpful. At Bochum University Museum, its head curator,
Dr. Cornelia Weber-Lehmann, amiably facilitated access to the Schüller
collection there and provided valuable information, while Karin Goethert
allowed us to reproduce some figures from her catalogue; our further
thanks to the Maison Mediterranéenne des Sciences Humaines,
Aix-en-Provence; the Maison de l’Orient, Lyon; and the Centre
Archéologique de Lattes (UMR 5140, CNRS). Our special thanks to
librarians Marie-Paule Seure, and Brigitte Nouvel (Aix), Véronique
Humbert, and Christine Lam (Lattes).

Our project further profited from the interest and generosity of many
individuals. Birgitta Wohl is grateful to—among others—John Traill
(Toronto) for expert assistance with some Greek inscriptions. Jean
Bussière is especially indebted to Donald M. Bailey and Carlo Pavolini
for always answering his various questions and providing encouragement;
to Laurent Chrzanovski for free access to his rich lychnological
documents at the Institut Multimédia Roumain-Suisse directed by his
wife; and to Michel Feugère (CNRS UMR 5138 MOM LYON) for his constant
availability and willingness to tackle our electronic problems.

Many others in the scholarly community on two continents gave of their
time and expertise in small and large questions, discussions, and
suggestions—especially during the various congresses of the
International Lychnological Association (ila). We cannot mention them
all, but we wish to express our thanks particularly to the following:
Nina Berson (Los Angeles), Anastasia Dinsmoor (Washington, D.C.), Marc
André Haldiman (Geneva), Marcus Heinrich Hermanns (Cologne), John Lund
(Copenhagen), Maria Marani (Rome), Jean-Louis Podvin (Lille), John
Pollini (Los Angeles), Laurent Wilmet (Namur), and Denis Zuravlev
(Moscow). We thank Jean-Claude Rivel (Bastia) for his excellent drawings
and his generosity in sharing his own lamp collection.

Finally, we wish to express our warm thanks to Marion True, former
curator of Antiquities at the J. Paul Getty Museum. She initiated the
catalogue project and supported it by giving us the possibility to work
from an excellent set of black-and-white photographs, making it possible
to start the study at a time when the lamps themselves were crated up
and inaccessible. Without the additional help of Kelly Ramage (Los
Angeles) the work would have been much further delayed. He rapidly and
ably created the multiple color work photos necessary for the next
stage. His constant readiness and generosity in sharing his considerable
expertise, also in electronic communications, was a welcome support,
which we greatly appreciate.

J. B.

B. L. W.
